Cognito handles login + identity federation + JWT issuance.

Your backend receives JWTs → uses them to know who the user is (authn).

For each request, the backend queries SpiceDB to decide what the user can do (authz).

Example: check(user_id, "read", "document:123") → true/false.

This separation follows the classic AuthN vs AuthZ split:

Authentication (Cognito): Who are you?

Authorization (SpiceDB): What are you allowed to do?


⚖️ Why not “just Cognito”?

If you only used Cognito:

You’d have to encode all role/permission logic into JWT claims at login time.

Any permission change would require re-login or token refresh.

Complex resource-level permissions (like "can comment on issue #42 but not issue #43") don’t fit well into static JWT claims.

Cognito groups are flat and coarse-grained, not relational (no “this user is a member of this team, which owns this project”).

✅ In short:
You use Cognito for authentication and JWT issuance, and SpiceDB for scalable, fine-grained RBAC/ABAC authorization. Cognito alone is not flexible enough for complex, dynamic RBAC at resource-level granularity.


Great follow-up 👍

RBAC vs ABAC
RBAC (Role-Based Access Control)

Users are assigned to roles.

Roles have predefined permissions.

Example:

Role: editor → can edit_documents.

Role: viewer → can read_documents.

✅ Simple, predictable.

❌ Gets messy with many exceptions (e.g., "editor but only for project X").

ABAC (Attribute-Based Access Control)

Access decisions are made based on attributes of:

User (department, clearance level, age, subscription tier, etc.)

Resource (document owner, resource sensitivity, project ID, region, etc.)

Environment/Context (time of day, IP, location, request type, etc.).

Instead of "roles", you define policies that evaluate attributes dynamically.

Example policy:

User.department == "Finance" AND
Resource.type == "Invoice" AND
Request.time < "18:00"


→ Then allow action.

Comparison Example

RBAC:

Alice is Manager role → Managers can approve expenses.

Bob is Employee role → Employees cannot approve expenses.

ABAC:

Alice can approve an expense if:

User.department == Expense.department

AND Expense.amount < 10,000

AND Request.location == "HQ"

Here, Alice’s ability depends on attributes of both the user and the resource.

🔗 Where SpiceDB fits

SpiceDB supports relationship-based access control (ReBAC), which can express RBAC and ABAC-style policies:

RBAC → Users linked to roles.

ABAC → Attributes stored as relationships or contextual conditions.

ReBAC → Even richer (users related to resources via groups/teams/projects).